Post-Execution transaction and SDM specs (#908)
ethereum-optimism/specs: specs/protocol/post-exec.md

- [The Post-Execution Transaction Type](#the-post-execution-transaction-type)
  - [Encoding](#encoding)
  - [Transaction Hash](#transaction-hash)
  - [Transaction Field Projections](#transaction-field-projections)
  - [Signer and Signature](#signer-and-signature)
  - [Mempool and Propagation](#mempool-and-propagation)
- [Post-Exec Payload Envelope](#post-exec-payload-envelope)
  - [Schema Version](#schema-version)
  - [Block Number](#block-number)
  - [Defined Schema Versions](#defined-schema-versions)
- [Block-Level Structural Rules](#block-level-structural-rules)
- [Receipt](#receipt)
- [Derivation](#derivation)
- [Rationale](#rationale)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

<!-- All glossary references in this file. -->

[g-transaction-type]: ../glossary.md#transaction-type
[g-sequencer]: ../glossary.md#sequencer
[g-post-exec-payload]: ../glossary.md#post-exec-payload
[g-post-exec-schema-version]: ../glossary.md#post-exec-payload-schema-version
[g-sdm]: ../glossary.md#sequencer-defined-metering

## Overview

Post-execution transactions are an [EIP-2718] [transaction type][g-transaction-type] that allows a block to carry

> sequencer-provided consensus data. Unlike user-submitted transactions, a post-exec transaction is synthesized by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sequencer-provided consensus data. Unlike user-submitted transactions or deposited transactions, a post-exec transaction is synthesized by the
```
you could link to the relevant part of the glossary.

included in a block.

## Post-Exec Payload Envelope

[post-exec-payload-envelope]: #post-exec-payload-envelope

The post-exec payload is RLP-encoded as a list whose first two fields are fixed:

```text
[version, blockNumber, ...schema-defined fields...]
```

| Field         | Type     | Description                                                                    |
| ------------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `version`     | `uint8`  | [Schema version](#schema-version) selecting the layout of the trailing fields. |
| `blockNumber` | `uint64` | The L2 block number this payload is anchored to.                               |
| _trailing_    | _varies_ | Defined by the active [schema version](#defined-schema-versions).              |

The leading two fields define the envelope; all remaining fields belong to the schema selected by `version`.

### Schema Version

`version` is the [post-exec payload schema version][g-post-exec-schema-version]. When the payload schema needs to
gain or change fields, a new version number is assigned and the new layout is documented as a

> [defined schema version](#defined-schema-versions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`version` is the [post-exec payload schema version][g-post-exec-schema-version]. When the new payload schema calls for additional or different fields, a new version number is assigned and the new layout is documented as a
[defined schema version](#defined-schema-versions).
```

Nit: slightly clearer for me.

### Block Number

`blockNumber` anchors the payload to the L2 block number of the containing block. The anchoring serves two
purposes:

1. It guarantees that two otherwise identical payloads produced for different blocks have distinct
   [transaction hashes](#transaction-hash).
2. It detects misordered or replayed payloads at decode time, before any schema-specific validation runs.

The normative rule that `blockNumber` equals the containing block's number is stated in
[Block-Level Structural Rules](#block-level-structural-rules).

### Defined Schema Versions

| `version` | Schema                                 | Status       |
| --------- | -------------------------------------- | ------------ |

> | `1`       | [Sequencer-Defined Metering](./sdm.md) | Experimental |

Reviewer: I would personally vote to not have this "status" field. Schemas are either in or out, and SDM will be the initial schema.

## Block-Level Structural Rules

The following rules hold for every block, regardless of which schema version is active. Any violation invalidates
the block.

1. **At most one.** A block contains at most one transaction with type byte `0x7D`.
2. **Last in block.** When a `0x7D` transaction is present, it MUST be the final transaction of the block.
3. **Anchored to block.** The `blockNumber` field of the embedded payload MUST equal the L2 block number of the
   containing block.
4. **Recognized schema.** The payload's `version` MUST be a [defined schema version](#defined-schema-versions).
5. **Schema must be active.** When no schema version is active for the block's timestamp, the block MUST NOT
   contain a `0x7D` transaction.

Schema-specific validity rules (e.g. constraints on the trailing fields) are layered on top of these envelope rules
and are specified by each schema's document. Both layers MUST hold for the block to be valid.

## Receipt

A post-exec transaction emits a receipt with type byte `0x7D`. The RLP-encoded consensus fields of the receipt are
identical to those of an EIP-1559 receipt:

- `postStateOrStatus` ([EIP-658])
- `cumulativeGasUsed`
- `logsBloom`
- `logs`

> A post-exec transaction is constructed by the protocol, executes synthetically, emits no logs, and consumes no gas

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A post-exec transaction is constructed by the protocol, does not execute, emits no logs, and consumes no gas.  It is metadata.
```

> A post-exec transaction is constructed by the protocol, does not execute, emits no logs, and consumes no gas.  It is metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A post-exec transaction is constructed by the protocol, does not modify the state, emits no logs, and consumes no gas.  It is metadata.
```

nit: slightly better IMO since it is not always clear what we mean by "execute"?

Author: I updated it to `A post-exec transaction is constructed by the protocol; it is not executed as EVM code, emits no logs, and consumes no gas from the block gas pool`. It does modify some state, even if it is not executed as EVM code.
